Welcome back fellow mitochondriacs for
the next half of the podcast with
Professor Thomas Seaff Freed. I hope
that you enjoyed and got value out of
the first half and I think this part
will be even more valuable. In this half
we talk about a diverse amount of
topics. We talk about calor restriction
and the degree of calor restriction that
would be beneficial. We talk about the
GKI and the GKI calculations and how it
relates to calorie restriction. We talk
about some basic strategies to get into
nutritional ketosis the most painless
way possible. We talk about glutamine
targets as well as glutamine
transporters as targets. We talk about
barriers to studies using ketogenic
metabolic therapy. We talk about
glutcorticoids, ketones for fuel. Are
oxidative therapies necessary? What
about people who cannot get their GKI
less than two? We talk about those folks
as well. I think this is going to be a
pretty action-packed continuation of the
discussion between Professor Seaf Freed
and I. So, without further ado, let's
get into it. But, Professor, I have a
question. Um, this this dovtales nicely
into a couple of things. Number one,
what is the level of calorie restriction
that where you get benefit? Is it like a
dose response where like the lower the
calories the better or like how do you
how do you determine what is clinically
relevant calorie restriction for the
ketogenic diet?
>> Well, that's why we developed the
glucose ketone index calculator. It was
a very uh simple tool which tells you at
what point uh do you achieve what we
call nutritional ketosis and we've
defined that as GKI values of 2.0 or
below. uh usually, you know, like you're
a young guy, healthy, uh you could
probably get into a low GKI uh with wi
with a minimal level of discomfort. Um
but once your ketones and glucose are
unity in the blood, uh you're pretty
much in a millar way. That's why we did
a milloler uh you're you're in
therapeutic ketosis. This is like our
paleoethic ancestors that were mostly in
these states of nutritional ketosis
except perhaps during seasonal times
when grapes fruit was ripe or things
like that. Uh but but often times we are
geared to be in and out of nutritional
ketosis depending on the amounts and
availability of the fuels. Um in today's
society we're rarely if ever in
nutritional ketosis uh because of the
abundance of highly processed carbs
everywhere. So, we really never allowing
the machine that we've been gifted with
to um you know, it's like having a
sports car and never and never taking it
out of first gear, right?
>> Um you know, it's it's you know, we got
to let the body uh experience the full
range of what we evolved to do and
nutritional ketosis. And when you say
fasting, when we when we did the 40%
calorie restriction in the mice to get
those phenomenal changes in angioenesis
a and tumor shrinkage and all that. Um
we we measured the glucose and ketones
and we measured this and then we have a
paper published uh showing that what
does that mean in terms of a human
being. So you have to go back and look
at differences in basil metabolic rate.
The basil metabolic rate of the mouse is
seven times faster than that
approximately than a human. Their heart
rate is 650 beats per minute.
>> Wow.
>> I mean, if we did that, our head would
blow off our body. Yeah.
>> So, we we have to we have to recognize
evolutionary differences in basil
metabolic rate at the bioenergetic
principles. And then we found out to
achieve what a 40% calorie restriction
in the mouse would be, we have to do
water only fasting for about 14 to 21
days. Wow. and we measure our glucose
ketone index and you should see how how
cancer cells get demolished. I believe
it then I put in the concept of
autoolytic cannibalism in my book. Uh
once your body is in these extreme
energy restricted states, we have a
internal surveillance system in our body
that uh um evaluates efficiency of all
of all systems. Cells and organs have to
be operational at at operating at
maximal energy efficiency and
conservation. Tumor cells are
inefficient. They're they're they're
producing energy energy. The body will
turn on those cells and consume them for
the good of the whole, redistributing
their metabolites for the rest of the
cells that can use them energetically
efficiently. So it's an unbelievable
system and we rarely in modern medicine
allow our bodies to uh uh enter into
these uh natural healing zones. We we
are preventing many times the treatments
that we give patients are actually
interfering with the body's natural
capability of healing. So um and that
again goes back to an understanding of
evolutionary biology. So, you're saying
that in order to replicate the 40%
calorie restriction that you did for the
mice, you'd have to do water only
fasting for several days. So, if I took
a patient and they let's say we
calculated their BMR of let's say easily
2,000 calories and I put them at 1,800
or 1500, that would not be anywhere near
where you need to be. Is that fair to
say?
>> Well, no, actually, see, we thought
about all this stuff because at first
when we thought when we came to realize
this, in fact, we talked about it in the
lab. you know, you you you don't get a
lot of people that say, "Wow, I can't
wait to not eat for 3 weeks." I mean,
there you don't get a lot of people
lining up to do that.
>> Um, so that's why we thought because I
worked in the epilepsy field for
decades. I developed the first um
workshops for the American Epilepsy
Society on ketogenic metabolic therapy.
I worked with Jim Abrams and the Charlie
Foundation. Worked with all these
people. I was doing that well before I
was doing this cancer stuff, right?
though I knew little kids could do all
this and we knew how to manage seizures
with ketogenic metabolic therapy. So I
said it seems like the ketogenic diet
could replace therapeutic fasting uh as
a way to make to step into this a little
bit easier. So in our current treatment
protocols for cancer that we work with
in our clinics around the world uh we
recommend um you know doing a full blood
work on the patient starting uh and
you'd be surprised how many people have
parasites and their if you look at their
overall blood all the parameters that
you can look at how many of them are
within natural within what we call
healthy zones versus those that are
outside of healthy zones. Uh and then we
try to bring that patient back and we
use we use like carnivore we use very
low carniv carbohydrate diets uh slowly
because it's stepping it's stepping
slowly into water only fasting like if I
if I want to get to the the bottom floor
from a second floor I could either jump
out the window and hit the floor real
hard in two seconds or I can walk down
the stairs but I'm get we're both
getting to the same spot one is painful
one is not
>> right. So, so we stair step the body and
we transition the body gradually and
there is, believe me, there is a a
reaction in your body to carbohydrate
restricted diets. Uh there's even a
bigger reaction if you go cold turkey.
Try going cold turkey. No, it's hard.
>> Yeah. Oh, yeah. So, so we we try to make
the transition from one metabolic state
to the other as painless as possible. So
when you jump off that last step onto
water only fasting, it's not so
traumatic to your body. It's already
semi-adjusted to this. That's when we
come in with the ambendazol and the dawn
and all these other things in low doses.
Um so then the the management of the
disease now becomes a a lot less
traumatic and and difficult for the
patient. So and Alicia Helus in
Minnesota, she's a physician assistant.
Uh she her she's training her own the
clinicians there. Um, so we're going to
be doing all this and we're working with
um the MetFix. This is a new concept
that you're going to hear about it uh
over time. This is run by uh Greg
Glassman and Emily Kumer Kaplan. They
worked the broken science initiative.
Greg was the owner and of CrossFit and
he knew how to distribute health health
procedures throughout the world. So,
we're going to be building these new
concepts of metabolic health uh which is
going which are going to integrate uh a
lot of what we've done and developed
here at Boston College into a workable
platform uh where physicians and
patients can all work together on this
METFIX platform where there's training
sessions bringing people out of states
of of ill health into states of health.
That's really cool. which are going to
integrate all of these different kinds
of things uh to uh improve uh your
metabolic state of health. But it's
going to be done in such a way uh where
it's not going to be so painful or
restrictive and and you're going to see
the results and that's why we developed
the glucose ketone index calculator
which is going to be linked to these
zones of metabolic health uh through
apps that we're developing. So, uh, all
of this is going to be the the platform
for the for the massive transformation
of health care in the country. We're
going to manage all these chronic
diseases. No question about it. Um, and
we're going to make it enjoyable and
desirable uh on the part of the
population and the medical schools, they
better get on board quicker. they're
going to be out get or get out of the
way because they they they they have to
be participatory uh and they will be
because the there's going to be a huge
demand on the part of the population.
>> I agree. It has to come from the patient
grassroots demand. I agree.
>> Yeah.
>> I I want to I want to say that the the
GKI is beautiful. Um it's easily
obtained and tracked. But I think one of
the questions that people have number
one is is there any clinical way to know
whether or not you're restricting
glutamine enough with drugs? Like is
there any clinical tools that we could
have to say oh yeah this is a good
range?
>> Well, this is a very important question
because people ask me this all the time.
First of all, there's no diet that we
know of except uh excessive exercise
will lower glutamine, right?
>> Um we we know we know that. But is it
low enough to really put the pressure on
the tumor cell? We have a paper that's
in bioarchchives right now that you can
look at talks about the levels of
glutamine and this kind of stuff. Um,
but glutamine is the most abundant amino
acid in the bloodstream. It surpasses
that of any of the other amino acids. So
we're already super saturated uh with
glutamine rightly so because heart
attacks or in interruption of oxfos or
any of these kinds of things we
certainly have to make a rapid
transition to a fermentation metabolism
and we have to protect our immune system
and our gut and all these other things.
So but but and the cancer already what
we have is super saturated for a cancer
cell's design need for glutamine. So um
that's why we have to use drugs uh to
get to the heart. We block glutamin the
glutamin glutaminasis the enzyme that
metabolizes glutamine to glutamate right
>> that's the first big step uh uh that way
and the dawn is interesting because it's
a dirty drug and a dirty drug targets
multiple glutaminases simultaneously see
a lot of the big drug companies they're
all aware of this stuff are you kidding
me but they want to patent stuff to make
billions of dollars right
>> and what they want to do is they want to
patent a target a one of the subunits of
the glutaminase uh family. It doesn't
work. It doesn't work. Or they target
the glutamine transporters. It's like
whack-a-ole. No, no, there's a dozen
glutamine transporters. Uh the body has
evolved to have multiple ways to get
this fuel into the system. The best way
is a dirty drug like like like Dawn, but
if it's used correctly under the right
conditions, it can be extremely
powerful. So So uh and we're learning to
do that. We're we're working on these
things. So, we have all of the tools. We
have everything needed to effectively
manage cancer. All we have to do is try
it out in clinics. Uh, be allowed to do
that. We're not allowed to do it at the
top hospitals. They will only allow us
to do this after the patient fails
standard of care. This is crazy.
>> Can you do it alongside a standard of
care at least? Can you do it alongside?
>> Yeah, but they want us to do like for
glyopblasto. Uh oh, you got to irdiate
that person first before we do like
Jethro, a physician out at Cedar Cyanide
and Cyani out there in Los Angeles and
and these places. They won't allow us to
do metabolic therapy as an upfront uh
platform. Uh and they they resist uh
blocking rad they will not stop the
radiating radiation of the brain which
is to me criminal.
>> I know
>> I hate to say it, you know. I know
there's a lot of good people out there.
Um, but they're radiating the brain,
freeing up massive amounts of glucose
and glutamine doing that. And then
they're surprised why their patients
don't survive. And they keep doing it
over and over again with the same
result. Oh, every now and then you'll
find some guy who who survives and you
say, "See, it works on him." Um, but but
90 about 95% of the others it doesn't
work on and and you're killing all these
poor people and you should never be
irdiating the brain. So what we want to
do is come in with a a really powerful
metabolic ketogenic metabolic therapy.
Shrink that damn tumor down.
Anti-angioenic, anti-inflammatory. Let
the surgeon come in now and debulk the
tumor. Uh then follow this up. Don't use
steroids, but only for a short period of
time to reduce some of the inflammation
following the surgical procedure. Don't
irdiate the damn brain for Christ's
sake. You raise blood sugar like there's
no tomorrow. the brain swells and gets
heated. So you have to use the steroids
otherwise your patient is going to be
unconscious. So you're doing all this
stupid stuff that's that should not be
done right.
>> So so and when I give lecture when I
talk they get all pissed off at me. I
know
>> it's not like they're saying oh this is
really important information.
>> They want to burn me at the stake. You
know, I think that there is I I think
sometimes, you know, people people hear
your lectures about in particular about
radiation and and and and
gluccocorticoids like you know,
dexamethasone, which is what we
generally use for like, you know, any
kind of like cerebral edema. I think
that people think it's an all or nothing
like if you know I I think I agree. I
and and I'm sure you could explain
exactly why you should not use
glucaorticoids to people with with
cancer. It's now part of like the
standard of care for a lot of different
chemo regimens. I don't understand
really exactly why, but they do it. Um,
but you know, but there are certain
cases where like you're talking about
someone who has cerebral edema, you
know, and they're going to be
unconscious for like a midline shift.
Obviously, there's times and places for
it, but it's just in general, it's not a
good idea to use gluccocorticoids. Um,
>> no, no. I, as I said, we use it I re I
recommend it um strategically
uh not not just haphazardly,
>> right? um uh there there is a place for
everything. We're not throwing out all
parts of the standard of care. We're
just rearranging the how to use the best
parts more strategically than what's
currently being done. Uh we think
imunotherapies, radiation,
chemotherapies all have their place uh
in the in the in the in the overall
treatment of the patient, but it but it
has to be done in the right order and in
the right way. And it's not being done
that way today. And we're putting even
the survivors when you say, "Oh, we have
millions of cancer survivors." I would
say a good majority of those pay a
serious price in general health as being
a survivor. Uh when your body is
irdiated, whatever that organ was that
was irdiated, it's never going to be uh
the same again.
>> And the other thing too is about 50% of
the people who are treated for cancer
die from the treatments. um uh you know
hyper progressive diseases all this you
know these guys that come on the TV at
night telling you about how wonderful
Katruda and Abdivo and all this they
spend more time telling you how the drug
is going to kill you than how it's going
to help you and they're doing that
because the damn drugs will kill you.
>> I've seen it I've seen in real life.
>> I have a question though. Um, there are
a whole host of papers that I can only
assume, I hate to say, I hate to assume
mal intent, but that seem to want to
just muddy the waters trying to say that
acetate or beta hydroxybutyrate grows
cancer. And if you look at I I did a
whole couple videos on it because I was
interested in it. It seems like they're
using like these super physiologic
amounts of acetyl acetate or beta
hydroxybutyrate and they they never
block glucose and glutamine at the same
time, of course. So they but then they
try to make it seem like oh well the a
ketogenic diet is now growing cancer and
it scares the be Jesus out of patients
and I did a whole video on it but I just
wanted to get it from you that cancer
cannot use substrate level
phosphorilation for these other amino
acids that are glucagenic or ketogenic
or just the straight up ketone bodies
they cannot be fermented.
>> Well we we're not 100% sure about that.
Uh what we do know it's a logistical
issue. Um cancer cells can use uh well
my colleague um u Christo Shernopoulos
we published a paper showing glutamine
is the only amino acid with pure gold
energy it doesn't require energy to get
to energy uh where all other amino acids
their carbon backbone has to be
reconfigur reconfigured in order for it
to be metabolized to to um alpha
ketoglutarate in the TCA cycle. So
there's energy and so it's kind of a an
equal sum game right uh you have to
expend energy to get energy whereas
glutamine is pure energy. Uh but the
other issue of course is the amount of
these things that are available to drive
the disregulated growth and generally
they're found in much lower amounts.
Asparagene is one of the ones that can
be used a little bit by the tumor cell
uh but there's not a lot of it to drive
the cancer cell is energy inefficient.
So you have to have a large amount of
supply of the fuels that are going to
drive it. That does not mean because we
interrogated the brain tumor cells human
and mouse to ask are there any other
fuels that can replace glutamine? And
the answer is no. But there are others
that have some push. So if we had enough
of those amino acids in the micro
environment of the tumor, yes, they
could keep that tumor cell alive. But
the problem is the body doesn't have a
lot of that available in the micro
environment. So clearly it's a
logistical issue as as as well as a a
biochemical uh uh capability of using
the fuel. So uh we've looked into all of
that and uh glutamine is is the standout
and we know that from so many thousands
of papers but they all thought it was
respired. Right?
>> The new the new big breakthrough is it's
fermented.
>> Right? So that that that tells us now we
we have to think more carefully about
how to block glutamine fermentation and
uh and when you do that together with
glucose fermentation and transition the
body over to a fuel they can't use and
we published a paper showing that all
the lipid droplets in the cytoplasm of
these tumor cells are a biomarker for
insufficient oxidative phosphorilation.
They accumulate lipids because if they
try to burn the lipids they'll get
reactive oxygen species and die. So the
best way to protect is make vacules full
of lipids drops and and if you look at
all the science and nature papers saying
that those lipids are there to drive the
disregulated growth making the
assumption that they use oxidative
phosphorilation you can see how the same
fact is interpretated interpreted in a
strikingly different way.
>> Right?
>> So um and and our our that's all we do
here. We don't do anything else except
have these kinds of conver the
conversation you're giving me. We do.
That's all we do here.
>> That's awesome.
>> That's all we do. We talk about this
247. We're always talking about this. Is
there something we missed? Is there a
piece of factual information that we
have overlooked? And the answer is not
yet. So, so we have a clear path on how
to manage cancer, but the but the
obstacles are no longer scientific.
>> They're they're outside the realm of
science. Can I ask you sir um in your
2017 paper that was the I I don't know
if that was the most famous one that was
about you know metabolic therapy for
cancer that one with the graphic with
the little man and the you know
>> oh yeah that was the press pulse
>> that was a great paper fantastic paper
but but in that paper it was clearly it
showed as part of the press pulse having
hbot or some kind of oxidative stressor
>> and then the 2025 or 2024 December paper
it it is not there is are you guys at
the belief that is no longer required
for oxidative stress in addition to
>> I I I think in the 2025 paper my my goal
my goal there was to show that the
science is supporting stronger the
mitochondrial metabolic theory uh uh
than the sematic mutation theory. We we
did not go into a deep dive on the
treatment uh project other than saying
uh lower glucose and glutamine while
transitioning the body over to
nutritional ketosis. My colleague Don D.
Augustino and I published papers on
hyperbaric oxygen. Um that works really
well if you can get your the patient
first into nutritional ketosis. uh
because hyperbaric oxygen dissolves
oxygen directly in the liquid blood and
and if you are if you you have to
realize the cancer cell has a very
powerful antioxidant system.
>> Yes.
>> Uh also driven by glucose and glutamine.
So the carbons and glucose are making
glutathione in the pentos phosphate
pathway and glutamine is is metabolized
to glutamate which is part of the the
glutathione and the and the and the and
the glutamine is also contributing to
the superoxide dismutase antioxidant
system. So the gl the carbons of glucose
and glutamine are also powerfully
protecting through antioxidant systems.
So if you pull the plug on the glucose
and glutamine and put patients in
hyperbaric oxygen. The the other thing
too is we have to be very careful in
brain cancer um uh you really you really
have there was a one of my physician
colleagues told me he said got a
terrible cerebral hemorrhage from
somebody going into a hyperbaric chamber
but they were not in nutritional
ketosis. As you said you got to do all
this the right way. you really have to
have a very knowledgeable physician uh
working together with the patient
knowing what they can and cannot handle.
Now for non cerebral cancers uh uh not
involving the central nervous system
like the lung and breast and colon and
this kind of thing. Yeah, if you can get
your patient into a low GKI for a couple
of weeks, you hit them with menendazol,
uh, and put them into a hyparic oxygen,
uh, you're gonna you're gonna you're
gonna have another and it's non-toxic
when you have it that way. You're really
protecting your body because the normal
cells are burning ketones, uh, which
protects them against oxidative stress
and the cancer cells can't do that. So,
they're going to be maximally
susceptible to oxidative stress. And we
say that you can replace radiation to a
large extent by hyperaractic if your
patient is in nutritional keto. This is
so exciting.
>> Wouldn't you say what we're saying?
Wouldn't you say that mechanistically,
you know, introvenous vitamin C or HBO
or radiation therapy or photodynamic
therapy or whatever the whatever the oxy
stressor soup dour is when you are
restricting glucose and glutamine and
you're restricting glutathione
production within these cancer cells
would ne would would be interchangeable.
Would you would you say
>> yes? Yes, absolutely. Some people may do
better on vit IV vitamin C than
hyperbaric or vice versa or or
photodnamic therapy. All all I know is
that everything works better when the
body is put into nutritional ketosis.
Even chemo, toxic chemo works better.
>> So So we're not we're not arguing.
You're right. You're right. Just that
how many people are doing this? Nobody.
So uh there's no trials on any of this
stuff. Um they're not doing that. And if
they decide to do it, it's only after
the patient is in failed all
chemotherapy and rad expanded standard
of care. This is nuts. You know, we see
so many people that are really uh
shocked that they have cancer in the
first place. Oh, I'm healthy. I didn't
know I had this. And and then they go
and get poisoned and irradiated and then
they they go downhill fast. Uh why don't
you take this person and just bring them
into metabolic ketosis uh therapeutic
nutritional ketosis and then hit them
with these low doses of these drugs and
see how they respond? You can always go
back and use radiation and chemo if you
want to do that.
>> I'm a little I'm a little hesitant to
ask you this question because I'm afraid
you're going to have a an an all or
nothing answer and it's going to be uh
scary. But what I'll tell you is that
clinically
there are some people that despite their
best efforts that despite I mean really
putting together a lot of energy and
time and effort into it, they cannot get
their GKI less than two near one. Are
they just doomed or is is it just try
harder or like what do you is there is
there a way you can augment maybe
someone who can't get it into GKI of two
or less?
>> We there you're right about that. There
are some people uh we find out that they
they're trying to take some supplements
uh that some of these supplements can
block that. There's a lot of reasons for
that and some of them are biological
like carnitine deficiency syndrome. Some
of these things you just they just can't
get their ketones up. They can't get the
fatty acids to be metabolized by the
liver. The liver is the key organ that's
going to make the ketone. So some of
them might take exogenous ketones. Dom
Augustino is a big fan of this the
exogenous ketones. So, there are ways to
circumvent this, but again, uh we're
we're going to try a lot of that stuff
with the MetFix uh program. Um again,
we're not going to go uh we we're
looking at the general responses of
people and then we can start worrying
about the so-called outliers because the
outliers may represent unique medical
cases in and of themselves. Got it? But
but let's let's drop the death rate uh
for cancer, keeping people alive a lot
longer with a higher quality of life uh
along with other conditions and then and
then turn the attention to the outliers
that seem not to be able to get into
these particular zones. Is it something
they eat? Is something in their diet,
their lifestyle, their their home
environment? Or is it something
biological in their body themselves?
They could represent unique uh inborn
eras of metabolism that would only be
seen under these kinds of new
conditions. Got it.
>> So, so uh but right now uh I don't want
to uh dwell too heavily on I'm certainly
aware of them. Uh we we're always
getting these kinds of qu Yeah, it's not
I'm not offended by it. I just I just
hear about it and and uh my my goal is
let's let's just let's just put a stick
in the spoke of this cancer of um
phenomenon here, this epidemic of of you
know, I'm reading papers from the 1930s
and 40s on cancer and they pretty much
said it's very rare for anyone uh under
40 years of age to ever be found with a
cancer. Um and now we have so I can't
tell you how many people are in their
20s and 30s emailing.
>> It's it's really sad. Um and and you
know it's it's a failure of the medical
system to even recognize it. But also it
also makes you understand that it has to
be an environmental epigenetic
phenomenon, right? It can't it cannot be
mandelian genetics that would lead to
that, right? I mean
>> well the the somatic mutation theory
says that cancer is derived from
acquired mutations not not inherited the
germline mutations uh acquired that
affect uh cyclones and the uh control of
the cell cycle. Um we have shown and
others that the mutations the sematic
mutations are largely produced from the
reactive oxygen species in the
mitochondria and from the acidification
of the micro environment leads to a lot
of genomic instability and point
mutations the whole which is the field
is clearly showing we have 100 over 100
million different kinds of mutations.
Every tumor cell has a different kind.
Now, now we're finding driver mutations
abundant in normal cells that never form
cancer. Um, which were their gold their
their their golden fleece thing was the
driver mutation different from the
others. Well, they they're clearly muted
mutated in normal cells that don't form
cancer.
>> So, so um we're we're looking now more
at the at the change in global
physiology
uh that's underlying the origin of
cancer. And when you say epigenetics,
the mitochondrian is the most powerful
epigenetic system in the cell.
>> Right?
>> The nucleus does not produce energy. The
nucleus has no way to produce energy by
itself. Everything that goes on in the
nucleus has to have a source of energy
which is produced either in the
cytoplasm or or in the mitochondria by
either oxos or substrate level
phosphorilation. So the gene expression
signaling pathways, they all depend on
ATP. where's that ATP coming from? And
and the and don't forget the calcium
gradients created by the mitochondria in
the cytoplasm control the cyclones of
the cell cycle. So clearly we know when
that organel becomes corrupted, these
cells fall back on their ancient
fermentation pathways the way they were
being driven uh before oxygen came onto
the atmosphere billions of years ago. So
clearly we understand the biology and
the evolution and the biochemistry of
this problem and we have clear
strategies for managing it. The pro the
problem is it's not being heard or
understood by the med and I it's I I
believe me I think they hear they
understand but the present situation is
too profitable and too comfortable for
making the necessary changes to help the
poor sufferers that we see in these
clinics. I think it's always fascinating
for me to have stories of these
oncologists who will order a PET scan,
an FDG PET scan, which relies completely
on the fact that there's a huge amount
of uptake of glucose in the surrounding
environment to light that thing up to
make it a a hot spot, but then they'll
have them be okay with them eating
basically Twinkies when they're getting
their chemo. Like, it just it just
doesn't make any sense. There has to be
some kind of a disconnect. You know what
I mean? Like,
>> you see this? I have a a cancer cell
here eating a Twinkie.
>> Oh my god.
>> Um, so this Twinkie is 12 years old.
>> Okay.
>> I have a whole box of them. I I bought
them I bought the Twinkies when when um
Hostess was going out of business. I
thought I'd never see them again. So
here's one wrapped up in the wrapper.
And here's one taken out of the wrapper.
>> They look very similar.
>> They they look almost edible and they're
12 years old. And we're pounding this
kind of stuff daily. And everybody's
wondering why we have chronic disease.
It's in cancer. And yet they down, you
go down to Atlanta, they deep fry these
things and they put powdered sugar and
chocolate syrup on them.
>> Right.
>> So, um you know, it was bought out by by
um Schmuckers. Schmuckers, the dog food
company, uh bought out Hostess, and they
try to tell everybody we should be
eating Twinkies. And I say I put out a
thing. I said, "Yeah, cancer cells love
Twinkies more than anybody else does."
>> You know, I had I had found a a somewhat
interesting paradox. Um there is
it seems like meta analyses that show
that the more flavonoids a person eats
the lower your mortality is from cancer.
And I did a deep dive to figure out well
where are the majority of these
flavonoids coming from? And it seems to
be berries, right? And we're like, okay,
I'm thinking fructose, I'm thinking
glucose.
>> And I'm thinking, is it just that the
flavonoids, which I've that is something
that I have been studying for a while is
figuring out does ECG EGCG block glut
glutamine dehydrogenase or or or quer
block GLS or whatever it is. Is it the
fact that do you believe that the the
flavonoids have some biologic effect at
blocking glucose and glutamine that
supersedes the possible amount of
glucose that you'd be getting from those
foods? Like cuz it seems like there's a
paradox there.
>> I don't know if it's a paradox, but it's
a very interesting question. Uh but I
know that the monkeys monkey trial that
they did uh with I think they were
Macaks, we we talk about it for 10
years, they allowed these monkeys to eat
their natural diet uh which had a lot of
flavonoids in it. It was just their
natural their natural diet. Same with um
you know a lot of the primates. But they
for 10 years they they rubbed 20
methylanthrine on the on the skin of the
monkey to try to do skin cancer um which
I know is is a chemical carcinogen and
they got no skin cancer. Then they fed
it to the monkeys uh to see if they
could get colon cancer or something.
Then they injected and this these
experiments went on for 10 years with
these monkeys uh rubbing, feeding,
injecting uh carcinogens and never got a
I think one monkey got some sort of a
lymphoma out of the 50 monkeys in the
group. Can you believe this? 10 years.
>> Yeah.
>> And and the the the issue was they were
living in their normal diet and
lifestyle. They were feeding them the
foods. And I looked at some of the stuff
that like chimps and and gorillas eat.
They have a lot of flavonoids in their
natural diet. So there's some protective
event, but also uh they're in their
natural diet and lifestyle. Uh this is
very very different. So you you would
have to take those monkeys and feed them
uh not the flavonoids, but Twinkies,
pizza, you would have to give them the
same crap that we eat. And then you
would have to stress them. You would
have to find a way to stress those
monkeys. like have a have a a leopard
walk around their cage uh two or three
times a week putting the whatever fear
of whatever god the monkey god happens
to be that that monkey god would be uh
putting the fear of into them. Um and
you have to use emotional stress, food
stress, everything stress and then you
have to test to determine whether or not
they get cancer. Like I tell people on
the podcast that I went to this both the
the Franklin Park Zoo down here in
Boston and the uh uh the uh and the and
the San Diego Zoo and I asked them why
are you guys don't why don't you give
the chimps
jelly donuts and and pizzas and all that
and they said it would be animal
cruelty. I said would they eat it? Oh,
they'd been loving it. So u but because
it would have killed them,
>> right? Well, uh, and the other thing
too, we found out that, uh, in the wild,
I don't know who took the results, we
have a paper where they measured ketosis
in in oranga tanks, and half their life,
uh, they're in ketosis. And during the
fruits, when the fruits are available in
the jungles, they're not in ketosis. So
clearly, they move from from nutritional
ketosis to um non non nutritional keto,
non-tootic states, right? naturally.
These are natural rhythms of the biology
of of the individuals.
>> Seasonal eating basically.
>> Yeah. Seasonal eating, you know, and the
way to get can if people really want to
get cancer, you have to eat large
amounts of highly processed foods. You
have to be under a lot of stress, uh,
emotional stress, no friends. You you
have to have poor sleep and you make
sure you never exercise
>> or go outside and get better melatonin.
>> Yeah. Um, so you know, no happiness, no
friends, a lot of emotional stress, no
exercise, and you put yourself at risk
for canc. And even if you do all that
for 12 or 15 or there are still some
people who still don't get cancel that
times really,
>> but but we know what cancer is c. We
know what's causing it. We know what's
causing all these chronic diseases. And
it comes down to our diet and lifestyle.
And people, that's kind of a cliche.
What do you mean by diet lifestyle?
Well, our ancestors never had highly
processed foods. They were always on the
move. You know, they ate and kill bush
meat. Uh they would kill and eat
anything they could get a hold of. And
they were usually quite active. They
weren't sitting around.
>> Uh so you put all
>> And they had normal light cycles. They
did they weren't exposed to artificial
light at night and they went to sleep
when the sun went down and their
circadian rhythm was perfect and
>> Yeah. And and and you're right. And and
people say, "Oh, they died early." They
died from infections and injuries.
>> Uh but if you didn't have an infection
or injury, you could live to be quite
old. So, and they didn't have
antibiotics or surgeons to fix these
things, right? So, so a hip replacements
and knee replacements, all of these are
marvels of our new medical technologies
uh allowing people to have a healthier
life longer, far longer, but then we're
killing ourselves uh with the
environment that we're in,
>> right?
>> Um so,
>> are you familiar with the Hoffman effect
and methionine and stuff like that?
>> Um, a little bit, but I I don't know
what to say about it. um you know uh we
we you know we found in our
interrogation uh cyine and methane were
powerful killed the tumor cells so in
vitro so I don't know when you say
methionineless diets and all I I don't
know what to say about this
>> I understand yeah no I agree the cyine
the methane wasn't surprising to me when
I looked at your energy studies of
showing when you fed individual amino
acids they died but the
>> that was in vitro that was our in vitro
interrogation
>> I got Derek Derek's paper,
>> but cyine cysteine was a little bit more
confusing to me because I was like,
well, cysteine's required for
glutathione and redox homeostasis. So, I
was like, I thought maybe that would be
>> anyway more helpful, but okay. I just
didn't know if you knew about the
because I I get asked about it a lot and
I just I don't know what to make of it.
So,
>> well, you can only you can only answer
questions that we have hard data for.
Like I I've never tested Ivormectin. We
we stare we steered away from
ivormectton because of the political
craziness that was associated with it.
So when when Derek uh Lee asked me to
look at Ivormectin early on in our
studies as opposed to embendol, I said
no because whatever we find is going to
lead to a show and somebody's going
to get upset about it. So I just said
don't don't deal with it. But now we're
finding a lot of people seem to have
some success with Ivormectin.
>> I did a whole deep dive on it. It's it's
it it will lower a bunch of different uh
expression of a bunch of different gluc
gluccogenic enzymes like in the
glycolysis pathway and it's one of the
only things that I've found that will
lower the I can't remember the enzyme
exactly but it's the enzyme that
converts alpha to glutarate to suate or
suinal coate to suinate in that in that
uh
>> yeah yeah
>> it will it will so I I think it somehow
inhibits substrate level phosphorilation
from a from an expression side from the
enzyme that that
>> yeah well I I think this is going to be
the future you know we we have I
everybody knows about glutam
glutaminolysis
uh pathway I mean you you'll find
hundreds of papers in the scientific
literature on glutaminolysis but they
say glutamine is anoplurotic which is
feeding the TCA cycle no no it's dumping
it out uh glutam the end product of
glutaminolysis is suxinic acid
>> right
>> and and that's and don't forget it it it
it comes out but it's part of the
glutamine is deferred off to aspartate
in the transamination reaction and part
of it is dumped out as glut glutamate.
So glutamate is dumped out as as the
first it's glutamine to glutamate,
right?
>> And sometimes there's so much glutamate
it's just dumped out especially in the
brain uh where glutamate which is an
excitatory neurotransmitter causing
further death to neurons when you put
all that excitatory transmitter out
there releasing more glue uh glut
glutamate more and the astroytes are
sucking up all the glutamate turning it
back into glutamine for supposedly
neurons that are in the and they're dead
now. So the tumor cells are sucking down
the glutamine like there's no tomorrow.
So we've broken the glutamine glutamate
cycle allowing the the neurons are dying
and and the tumors are getting stronger.
So um you know we we look at all that
and then the aspartate of course
glutamate transaminated to aspartate
using oxoloacetate and and we need
aspartate for all these amino acids uh
that we need to be synthesized and the
nitrogen from the glutamine is allowing
us to synthesize nucleotides mRNA and
DNA. We have everything and that synergy
between the glycolysis and the
glutaminolysis pathways are powerfully
driving the beast and and crapping out
acidified molecules into the micro
environment creating inflammation and
and all of our immune cells are coming
into the micro environment throwing out
growth factors and cytoines in an
attempt to heal the wound creating uh uh
uh activities out of context uh leading
to as I said an escalating situ
situation of biological chaos. So, you
got to bring the system back in line by
depriving them of their fermentable
fuels.
>> Do you think there's a way to know
clinically if let's say I don't know
pancreatic cancer or prostate cancer
relies more on one ferment fermentable
fuel than the other? Like one's more
glucamine.
>> Yes, we think there are differences. Uh
obviously metastatic cancer is going to
be a whole range of things, but they're
all going to be needing glutamine
because they come from a macrofage myoid
fused hybridization that nobody wants to
believe. The the the idea of a stem cell
cancer stem cells is wonderful and
great, but they don't have the biology
to leave their local environment. They
don't have how do you go uh and and uh
intravisate into the into the um
circulation. The extravisation process,
the rolling the rolling procedure and
the biology of knowing where to exit the
bloodstream is a very sophisticated
biological process. That's another crazy
thing. When you think of metastasis,
they have a a clearly uh stereotypical
metac met metastatic cascade lo uh
proliferation, local invasion,
intravisation, immune system survival,
extravisation, whether you have colon
cancer, breast cancer, uh bladder
cancer, melanomas, they follow this
stereotypical cascade. Yet everybody
says random somatic mutations are create
causing all this stuff. How does
randomness create? And how does one
cancer have 10,000 different tumors? I
mean, it just creates a biologic
whack-a-ole for for oncology to then
say, "Oh, I got this mutation, this
mutation."
>> It's just it's Yeah,
>> it doesn't make any difference. The
mutations are largely irrelevant,
>> right?
>> Not to say they're completely
irrelevant, but the the enormous focus
on the part of the National Cancer
Institute on their website, cancer is a
genetic disease, right?
>> A hundred different diseases. Cancer is
a hundred different diseases caused by
mutations. They need to change that.
What we what that's you want to talk
about harming the population. The very
organization that's there designed to
help people is hurting people, right? I
went after them about that. It's you
might as well be talking to plug
sockets. They don't listen or understand
what the hell is going on or they can't
or they're controlled by somebody who
doesn't want them to change. No, I think
I think muddying the waters and making
it this ominous enemy is what makes it
so scary and uh and and and leads you to
put all of your faith blindly into the
system. You know what I mean? If you
knew that pretty much GBM or pancreatic
cancer or renal cell carcinoma or
whatever the cancer is, if they all have
these important and critical, you know,
things that they all have similar, you
know, a hallmark aka glutaminolysis,
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation, it it makes it less
ominous.
>> Oh, yeah. And and manageable. Okay. And
and and the fear, you know, when people
get diagnosed with cancer, uh, everybody
in the family changes. you feel like
you're you're you're now you're standing
hand in hand with the grim reaper.
>> Uh this has to be changed. This is not
right. I tell you, when you get
diagnosed with cancer, this is now your
opportunity to clean house and now get
rid of not only get rid of the cancer,
but bring your body back into metabolic
homeostasis,
>> right?
>> Something you might not be happy to do,
but at least it's not going to be so
ominous. Uh because, right, and because
they fear the treatments as much as they
fear the disease, rightfully so. said
50% of people die of the treatment. So
of course
>> yes and I think that's all they have and
then when and then solidifying that you
have major medical schools like Dana
Farber MD Anderson, Sloan Ketering,
Moffett, you have all these different
places and you think these guys know
what the hell they're doing. They
they're you trained to know how to use
the drugs at a dose that is not designed
to kill you on the spot,
>> right?
>> You know, but this is nuts. This is
medieval. I think the the the the people
who ran the Spanish Inquisition, the the
Dominicans would be very excited to hear
about what we're doing to cancer
patients today.
>> Do you think there's any utility in
these liquid biopsies or these these
stem cell uh circulating cancer stem
cell tests at all?
>> Um well, you know, I'm not really sure
about that. If we know how to manage the
disease and get rid of the cells, maybe
they'll tell us whether or not you you
you're you're purged. uh you know
circulating tumor cells there's not many
of them I mean we we have published a
paper we identified them uh in the
metastatic models that we that we used
but you know I I'm my my I'm laser
focused on getting rid of the damn tumor
in the first place we have a clear
strategy to do that so why am I going to
waste time looking at other things
they've approached me with all kinds of
stuff you know and I all I know is that
we we've just got to get vision you seem
to be one of the few guys that seems to
understand this I I I I study your work.
That's why I understand it.
>> Yeah. Well, the the question is now
don't forget we start of we starting a
new uh society, international society of
metabolic oncology where we're
collecting uh nutritionists, dietician,
physicians, uh basic scientists
throughout the world who are starting to
read the work uh realizing that the
science is telling us where we should be
going and they want to start
implementing this into the clinic. So
the science is the platform. It's the
bedrock. Now the clinicians must step in
with their knowledge of patients and
these other issues. How to best apply
this uh to to various uh cancer people
and different cancer they're all the
same. You know when you hear a thing we
have the treatment for your all the
cancers are similar as you said they
need glucose and glutamine and they
can't burn fatty acids or ketone bodies.
So how do we how do we make that ideal
for the cancers in different parts of
the body? So it's not so it's not as
complicated as what it would be. I think
the challenge now is going to be the
excitement. Once the clinicians realize
what they need to do, they will develop
ways and the best most efficient ways to
do this. Uh which is out of my sphere.
So this is now it's in your it's in your
part. Now that what we should not do is
make clinicians uh feel bad. the system
making them feel bad that if I do
metabolic therapy, I'm gonna lose my
license to practice.
>> Well, it's not just feeling bad. It's
like, are they gonna revoke my license?
Are you gonna take my board
certification away? Like, that's what
that what happens sometimes.
>> Yes. Well, it happens. I know many
physicians that's already happened to in
Canada and some other places
>> for for what they're trying to do.
They're trying to be the best for their
patients and the system. Who the who the
hell is part of the system? Who are the
guys writing these standards of care?
Who is who they always call the deep
state. The deep state is the system at
least in the medical profession. It is
>> it is it's a mafia.
>> Yeah. So, so uh the patients must make
the change.
>> They must become educated. They must
make the demand. I want metabolic
therapy, right?
>> You know, I want metabolic therapy.
Well, I never heard of that and it could
hurt you what more than radiation and
chemo is going to hurt.
>> I know, right? You know, we have all the
papers that are coming out on ketogenic
metabolic therapy are saying how uh is
it safe?
>> Nobody's talking about um dexamethasone,
>> right?
>> Or red devil or you know radiating
somebody's head till smoke comes out of
there. What is safe about that,
>> right?
>> You know, uh it's the whole thing is
upside down.
>> It is. It is. Do you think that there
will be true human clinical trials on
ketogenic metabolic therapy the way that
we you envisioned it? Is that is that
gonna happen?
>> It will come. We the Thomas Doy paper
that we published with 30 different all
constellation of folks uh want that to
happen. Okay. And if it doesn't happen
in the United States, it's going to
happen in one of the other participatory
countries and systems. Our colleagues in
Istanbul, Turkey have have achieved some
remarkable successes, right?
>> Uh bringing people back from terminal
one month
>> chemother.
uh and they're they they're following
they they uh adapted our work blended
with standards of care. So I think the
hybrid system is going to be the
transition. Uh it has to
>> does right to try have anything to do
with this like like like I don't know
like can you people can they decide that
they want to go into like a a trial or
some kind of a case report system where
>> it's very it's it's the bureaucracy is
horrific. Uh Al Alicia Hela Hel has
tried to do that for Dawn and you have
to go through the state medical boards
and then you have to go through the fed
federal medical boards and by the time
you get all the paperwork the patient's
dead.
>> Got it.
>> So um it's there in name but not
practice.
>> So and it's for one person. You can't
you can't do it on anything other than
one person. So this all has to change.
>> Yeah.
>> So um there has to be some breakthrough.
Uh but the the problem is is that the
system controlled by big pharma,
controlled by big academic institutions,
controlled by big hospitals, uh
everybody's backs slapping, making a
buck on this disease and all we're doing
is making the situation a hell of a lot
worse than it actually is.
>> People suffer on
>> Yeah, it's horrific suffering. So So our
goal is to end that and we're doing it
from the science perspective,
>> man. Do is there any areas that you're I
don't know or or upcoming like things
that you guys are excited about like
within metabolic therapy for cancer?
>> Yeah, I think it's the MetFix program by
by Glassman and Emily Kum. I think they
you know uh Greg Glassman built the the
the CrossFit organization. He's the one
that designed and built that then he
sold it. But I think what he's the
design now is the metix uh which is
going to have a similar kind of a design
but it's going to be more in realign to
what you're what you're speaking about.
How do we bring all of these different
new new perspectives together to reduce
cancer and chronic diseases using the
GKI as a tool uh to do this. So this is
going to be the future and uh so we have
in plan uh strategies through our
university through uh commercial
organizations and people that are
genuinely interested because a lot of
physicians want to get involved with
this as well. Uh they want to use this
me and the African-American community uh
absolutely interested in this. So so uh
the these people are the ones that are
brutalized the most. uh they don't have
access to a lot of the things that we
have access to where we can transform uh
those groups by training uh uh coaches
in in the African-American underserved
populations. So, so we can we can spread
this word far and wide and it will be uh
based on on each person's individual
metabolism and and interest in doing
this with stage programs uh to bring
people from an unhealthy situation to a
healthy situation. But we'll develop the
apps, we'll develop the tools, we have
papers that are in process right now
that are going to do all
>> that. Really sound that does sound
exciting. I guess I'm gonna I'm gonna
end on this because I think that this is
something that I I I just I want to
understand better.
Do you believe at this point that
the addition of oxidative therapies is
necessary for the management of cancer
or do you believe that just the glucose
and glutamine is enough to collapse the
energetics of the cell and that will
ultimately you know they'll the redux
homeostasis can't can't maintain if you
can't recycle glutathione and stuff like
that. So, do you need do you need to add
external
redux stress or is it enough I guess
just with glucose and glutamine?
>> I I I don't know. I mean, in the press
pulse paper, we certainly included it in
there. Of course, Dominic was one of the
one of the authors on the paper and we
published papers on that and he's the
expert on on hyperbaric oxygen. He's
he's a a world leader on hyperbaric
oxygen. But but I think knowing how to
do it again dosage timing and scheduling
that was the unknown in that paper uh
was the dosage timing and scheduling uh
and when we bring the different
treatment um approaches together and
that's where the clinical
uh uh future that's that's where you
guys are going to be the ones to to
standardize dosage timing and scheduling
uh for the future. um you're going to
see it because I don't have access to
patients.
>> Uh I I run the pre-clinical studies. So
the value of our work is that we we take
a lot of the anxiety or or um stress
away from the physician knowing that
we've tested these things in a
pre-clinical model and we've getting
these kinds of results. You guys have to
now uh develop the dosage, timing, and
scheduling for your patient populations.
And you know, you can do that a lot
better than we can because we can't talk
to the animal. You can talk to the
patient. Um, the animal tells us it's
unhealthy by its body movements and fur
and a few other things. We can see he's
not doing well. But you guys have a much
greater opportunity to perfect the
system and you have a lot more time uh
to make these adjustments because the
basil metabolic rate of the mouse is
like turbocharged, right? uh things that
a little change in drug and timing could
have an enormous impact on the outcome.
So uh but the bioenergetics is similar.
So that's why we left for the future is
that as you the clinical world will have
to work on the dosage timing and
scheduling because they know it will
work uh once you get it down and then
you're going to find
>> dozens and dozens hundreds of clinical
studies
>> uh designed to improve dosage timing and
scheduling for a broad range of cancers
and possibly other chronic diseases.
Yeah.
>> So I look at the future as extremely
bright. We clear we have a path uh
forward based on hard science and a
better understanding
of of the challenge. So of of the
disease state itself. We understand the
disease. We know what it needs and what
what it can't what it needs to survive
and what it can't use. So now we just
have to capitalize on that and then
let's see how it works. And I think it's
going to work because the clinical
trials we're getting some spectacular
results. I mean Pablo Kelly lived for
over 10 years. He died from a cerebral a
cerebral hemorrhage as the result. And
we spoke to him one week before he
passed away.
>> And we were laughing because I said,
"Pablo, you could outlive me." Um, and
we were laughing because he was
diagnosed with an inoperable tumor in
>> and it was operated on four times and
the last time he died from the a
cerebral hemorrhage from the And he
didn't need it because I he was doing it
was a conversation just like you and I
are having. He was laughing. I was laugh
Thomas Duri was there. We were all
having a good a good laugh about the
whole thing. And then he came out of the
surgery with thumbs up and he was doing
great. And then his wife was telling me
that oh he was all giddy and happy and
and then he had that night he died.
>> So um how long could he have lived if he
didn't didn't he was trying to cure
himself and I said be thankful that you
lived 10 years. He was
>> Yeah. Because the average is like nine
months, right? I mean it's like
>> well he had an he had an Idh1 mutation
which gives you a double survival so and
um it produces um uh two hydroxylutarate
but we found that two hydroxylutarate
destabilizes Hif 1 alpha which would
shut down the glycolysis pathway.
>> Correct. And also uh it it um it
converts alpha ketoglutarate to two
hydroxylutarate which would therefore
diminish some of the upstream um uh fuel
for driving mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation thereby reducing
suenate- which also stabilizes hif
alpha.
>> Yes, it does. So, so, so, uh, the IDH
and now we have all these, uh, I don't
know want to call them idiots, uh,
because that's pretty harsh, but they're
company people who want to make drugs to
block two hydroxyglutarate when two
hydroxyglutarate is like God's gift to
the cancer patient. It's it's a it's an
internal drug. It's a positive therapy
therapy. It gives you a double le and
now you want to take that away from
these cancer patients. Doesn't make any
sense. So,
so you know, you have to realize I'm
going to have a stroke just dealing with
the with the craziness that I have to
deal with on a regular basis.
>> That's something that I'm actually
interested in. You know, you you brought
up a good point of how suinate can
stabilize Hif one. There's actually a
lot of different what they call
pseudohypoxic factors including
hypoglycemia, including lactate,
including ROS that can stabilize HIF,
which is kind of like what I see is like
at least one of the main uh genetic or
like I don't know how what you call it
like a second messenger or something
like that would
>> drive all all glutaminolysis and
glycolysis.
>> Yeah. Well, this is the whole thing.
You're coming back to glycolysis and
glutaminolysis, right? Those are the two
pathways that are dependent on glucose
and glutamine which makes the problem
much less difficult or complicated
because if you're studying all
downstream effects all the time
signaling cascades mTor and all this
kind of stuff all these different
mutations and targeting all that's all
downstream effects of this disregulated
growth driven by fermentation take away
the fermentation
>> right
>> and people say it's too simple uh but
I'm sorry I'm sorry to have to make it
simple and disturb your worldview of
complexity right?
>> You know, but you want to live, you
better learn how to do this. Otherwise,
you're going to be part of the uh the
heap of dead people. 1,700 people a day
dying and it gets worse every year and
the younger and younger people are
getting cancer. Yep.
>> You know, uh this is tragic at the
highest levels and we have a clear path
to reduce that, improve that. And and
and and it's not it's not happening yet,
but it will.
>> Well, sir, you are paving the way. you
and your group and I just I couldn't be
more grateful for the papers you guys
publish and the work you guys are doing
because it it just it makes so much
sense if you're open-minded to receive
it, you know, it makes so much sense.
>> Yeah. And you know, but it's it's it's
we're not getting it's being we're
ignored basically. You're you're you're
being ignored except for that one paper
that I wrote that's but only because
it's they don't read the whole paper.
Anyway, listen, thank you for the
interview.
>> Yes. Thank you so much, sir. I
appreciate it. And I hope to do it soon.
>> I I enjoy speaking with people that
actually understand things, okay?
Because I have to do a lot of these
podcasts with folks that I I do my best
to dumb everything down. But in your
case, I don't have to dumb anything
down.
>> Well, I didn't want that cuz every
podcast you do, most of them, they are
people like, "Oh, cancer and glucose,
there's a relationship." You know, I I
didn't want it to be that kind of
podcast. I wanted to be based off of a
little higher level of understanding.
And I I think that we provided that
today and I I really appreciate the
answers you gave.
>> Yeah. And I that those are the kinds of
convers if you were in my lab, we would
have those conversations all the time
and every one of your questions would be
discussed to the point of uh nauseium.
So um because we don't like to leave any
stone unturned in our mission and if
there's anything out there that
challenges what we're trying to do or
understand what we're doing, I want to
know about it. I want to investigate it.
I want to look at and find out when we
see that um uh ketogenic diets cause
metastasis, what were the kinds of diets
they used? What were the control groups?
Uh what were all the things that they
used? Because we are the best in the
world at doing pre preclinical studies.
Dr. Mukerjee that works with me is the
best in the on the planet. She works
with those mice as if each one was her
patient. One in a mouse in a cage. Are
you kidding me? But you know what's
frustrating is is they they publish
papers like that and if you actually dig
into it, they were giving 100 times the
amount of uh acetyl acetate that you
could ever possibly get on a ketogenic
diet and there was like one more
metastases in the liver than the regular
the control diet. So it's like
>> what is that you know I'm like
>> yeah and a lot of times they use
genetically engineered animals uh which
are not representative of any real world
situation.
>> Interesting. It it's it's yeah these are
these are genetic monstrosities that
were created by uh crisper and all these
kinds of things that everybody thinks is
now really important. It's total a lot
of it every model has value but a lot of
those things they're they're putting
excessive weight on things that are not
representative of the real world and and
to get a grant from the NCI NIH you have
to have a unique model system. Nobody.
How is that going to drop death rates?
That's what I want to know. You created
a model that doesn't exist anywhere. So
when you do patient derived zenographs,
that's an N of one. You're taking the
cells out of one patient, putting it
into an imuni imuninompetent
genetically engineered mouse. And then
you're saying, oh, you know, I don't
know what's going on. For Christ's sake,
you're not using real. All of our models
are natural models. You want to you want
to fix something, you use the natural
model. You don't use some genetic crazy
thing.
>> That makes sense to me. Oh, sure. It's a
it's a wonderful statement of our uh
genetic sophisticate. I'm a geneticist.
I got my degree in genetics, but not but
it's it's a wonderful field, but but but
you went down the the rabbit hole in
what you're capable of doing just so you
can get NIH research grants, right?
>> Uh looking at some crazy thing that was
created. It's not a real world thing.
You try. We have never cured metastatic
cancer in our mouse
>> ever. We keep them alive longer and
longer and longer but we have never
achieved a complete cure uh uh uh in the
mouth. The only thing we really cured
was that dog with a mass cell tumor on
his face um which was dog I published
the paper in in uh with a with a a
veterinarian on the paper. So so um but
we have never cured a mouse. Oh and they
always say well you cure all the mouse
it doesn't work in human. Yeah, you
always use all these crazy models that
that aren't representative of the real
world.
>> And for someone like me who's a I mean
for a for a researcher, I'm a I'm a lay
person basically like I don't I'm not
able to make those distinctions. So
therefore I make assumptions,
questionable assumptions like you
mentioned in your paper that furthers my
bias or my you know
>> well that that paper was to bring uh um
uh that paper was to bring the entire
cancer field back on the right track.
That paper was awesome by the way.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, I we t we covered all
the key scientific issues. What happened
to Warberg? Why was he thrown under the
bus? He he he he was nominated for many
Nobel prizes. In fact, he was the most
nominated person. He got one from his
discovery of the cytochrome coxidase,
the respiratory enzyme, but um never for
his work on cancer besides Hitler told
him he didn't he wasn't allowed to get
Nobel Prize. So, all this kind of stuff.
But what we did for Warberg is is found
out where he was right and fix where he
was wrong. And that is a that that is
causing a lot of a lot of issues now
because they realize that if anybody
like you and others are going to start
to realize we where did we go wrong
>> on this whole shift for 75 uh years,
>> way too long, way too many lives.
>> Oh, terrible. Terrible. Well, we have we
have hope. And the hope is based on good
science. And I'm hoping that we're going
to drop the death rate. I want to see
those American Cancer Society numbers
going down. And the other thing they do
is they make everybody feel that we're
making advances. They said we dropped
cancer death rate by 33% because you
stopped smoking. It was all a prevention
campaign. No major developments from any
of this drug. Hundreds and millions and
billions of dollars thrown away, wasted.
Uh why can't people understand that? We
should get rid of those damn commercials
on TV pushing all that down the
throat of these poor people. You know,
this is this is just
>> we we've done a well, not me, but the
system has done a really good job of
deotizing the the the profession and
deotizing the ivory tower. And you know,
who who am I to say other? You know, I'm
just I'm just joking. And you're you're
going to be a very important factor in
in moving this field in the right
direction. you're a young guy, you have
a lot you you already know enough. Um,
you can see the power of what we're
talking about. You understand
better than most people do. So, so all
of these folks, there's going to be more
like you. Um, and and the change will
happen. U, so we're just starting it
from one side. You're you're on another
side.
>> I hope I hope I'm alive to see it is all
I'm saying.
>> Me. Well, I don't know if I will be, but
you damn well.
>> I I believe that you will. I do. I do.
not God, but I think that you will be
because I think it's already happening.
Um, I think patients who are interested
in this already know more than most
clinicians about this, which is I think
sad, but it is what it is.
>> You want to live, you you learn.
>> Yeah. Well, anyway, listen, thank you so
much. Yes, sir. Thank you.
>> And um I'll let you go now. Do you have
it recorded and everything?
>> Yes, sir. I do. Yes, sir. I do,
>> Professor. Thank you very much. Take
care.
>> Thank Thank you.
>> Yes, sir. Bye-bye.
>> Bye.
I want to just reiterate the gratitude
that I have for Professor Seafreed's
time that he spent with us today. And if
you like videos like this, if you want
to see more podcasts between myself and
innovative researchers in the field of
metabolic oncology, please like, share,
and subscribe. And until next time.